Installation
============

This building and installation guide should work for anything Unix-like, but in
particular it has been tested on, in terms of architecture for which the
executable is built,
* GNU/Linux: i386, x86_64
* Mac OS X: x86_64

Aside from standard C libraries and a basic development environment (gcc, etc.),
**gr1c** depends on [CUDD](http://vlsi.colorado.edu/~fabio/CUDD/), the CU
Decision Diagram package by Fabio Somenzi and others.  Also, gr1c interactive
mode optionally uses GNU Readline (disabled by default; see `USE_READLINE`
definition in Makefile).  The parser generator
[Bison](http://www.gnu.org/software/bison/) and the lexical analyzer
[flex](http://flex.sourceforge.net/) are required to build gr1c.  Other Yacc and
lex compatible tools may suffice, but this has not been tested.


Building
--------

For the latest development snapshot, either [clone the
repo](https://github.com/slivingston/gr1c) (at
https://github.com/slivingston/gr1c.git) or [download a
tarball](https://github.com/slivingston/gr1c/tarball/master).  For the latter,
untar the file (name may vary) and change into the source directory.

    $ tar -xzf slivingston-gr1c-658f32b.tar.gz
    $ cd slivingston-gr1c-658f32b

We will first build [CUDD](http://vlsi.colorado.edu/~fabio/CUDD/).
Alternatives, e.g., if you have a shared library of CUDD installed, are
described later as [additional build options](#altlib).  Let's make a directory
called `extern` for this purpose. At the time of writing, the latest version is
2.5.0. Below we use `wget` to download it from the command-line. You might also
try directing your Web browser at <ftp://vlsi.colorado.edu/pub/>, or see CUDD
documentation for instructions.

    $ mkdir extern
    $ cd extern
    $ wget ftp://vlsi.colorado.edu/pub/cudd-2.5.0.tar.gz
    $ tar -xzf cudd-2.5.0.tar.gz
    $ cd cudd-2.5.0

Now you should be in the root of the CUDD source tree. Open the `Makefile` in
your favorite editor (e.g., [Emacs](http://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/)) and
make sure the settings look reasonable for your setup.  The comments therein
should be enough to guide you.  If in doubt, consult the `Makefile` of gr1c, in
particular CUDD_XCFLAGS, which is known to succeed for x86_64 GNU/Linux and Mac
OS (64-bit; possibly requiring that the switch `-DBSD` be removed) and thus
could be copied directly into the setting of the XCFLAGS variable in the
`Makefile` of CUDD.  More generally, try

    XCFLAGS = -mtune=native -DHAVE_IEEE_754 -DBSD -DSIZEOF_VOID_P=N -DSIZEOF_LONG=M

where `SIZEOF_VOID_P` and `SIZEOF_LONG` refer to the number of bytes used for
`void` pointers and `long int` on your computer.  One method for finding
appropriate `N` and `M` is [described below](#determinewsize).  Finally,

    $ make

With success building CUDD, we may now build gr1c. Change back to the gr1c root
source directory and open the `Makefile`. There are two items to check. First,
be sure that CUDD_ROOT matches where you just built CUDD; for the version used
above, that would be `extern/cudd-2.5.0`. Second, be sure that CUDD_XCFLAGS
matches XCFLAGS that you used to build CUDD.  Finally, run `make`. If no errors
were reported, you should be able to see the version with

    $ ./gr1c -V

Later parts of this document describe [testing gr1c](#testing) and [additional
build options](#extras).

<h3 id="determinewsize">Determining word size on your computer</h3>

If you want to select `N` and `M` for `-DSIZEOF_VOID_P=N -DSIZEOF_LONG=M` as
suggested above, then you must determine the number of bytes used for `void`
pointers and `long int` on your computer. These will be provided as compile
flags when building CUDD and gr1c. An easy way to discover these is to place

    #include <stdio.h>
    int main()
    {
        printf( "void *: %lu\nlong: %lu\n", sizeof(void *), sizeof(long) );
        return 0;
    }

in a plain text file, say called `testsize.c`, and then

    $ gcc -o testsize testsize.c
    $ ./testsize

The output will give the number of bytes for each type.  For example, in the
case of 64-bit, you may see

    void *: 8
    long: 8


<h2 id="testing">Testing</h2>

Before deploying gr1c and especially if you are building it yourself, run the
test suite from the source distribution. After following the build steps above,
do

    $ make check

Optionally, set the shell variable `VERBOSE` to 1 to receive detailed progress
notifications.  E.g., try `VERBOSE=1 make check`.  Most test code is placed
under the `tests` directory. **N.B.**, scripted interaction will only work if
you build without GNU Readline.  If a test fails, despite you following the
installation instructions, then please open an [issue on
GitHub](https://github.com/slivingston/gr1c/issues) or contact Scott Livingston
at <slivingston@cds.caltech.edu>


Placing gr1c on your shell path
-------------------------------

To use the program `gr1c` outside of the directory you just built it in, you
will need to add it to the search path of your shell. Assuming you have
administrative privileges, one solution is

    $ sudo make install

which will copy `gr1c` and `rg` to `/usr/local/bin`, a commonly used location
for "local" installations.  This is based on a default installation prefix of
`/usr/local`.  Adjust it to the desired path by setting the environment variable
`GR1C_PREFIX` before invoking `make`. For example `export GR1C_PREFIX=~/local` will
install to `~/local/bin`. The programs `grpatch` and `grjit` are *not* included in as
an effect of `make install`. [Extra instructions](#extras) concerning these are below.


<h2 id="extras">Extras</h2>

Running `make`, as described above, will not cause the programs `grpatch` and
`grjit` to be built.  To achieve this,

    $ make all

Alternatively, you can request a specific executable, e.g., `make grpatch`.  To
install `grpatch` in the same place as `gr1c`,

    $ make expinstall

Other experiment-related programs, such as `grjit`, will eventually be added to
the list installed by the expinstall command.  [Doxygen](http://www.doxygen.org)
must be installed to build the documentation...including the page you are now
reading.  Try

    $ make doc

and the result will be under `doc/build`.  Note that Doxygen version 1.8 or
later is required to build documentation files formatted with
[Markdown](http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown), which have names ending
in `.md` under `doc/`.  For older versions, you can read Markdown files directly
using any plain text viewer.  E.g., the main page is `doc/api_intro.md`, and
this page is `doc/installation.md`.

You can clean the sourcetree of all executables and other temporary files by
running

    $ make clean

<h3 id="altlib">Alternatives for linking with CUDD</h3>

If you have CUDD available as a shared library (it is not officially distributed
this way, but some people have patched it thus), then you can pass alternative
flags to the gr1c makefile, e.g.,

    $ make all CUDD_INC='-I/opt/local/include/cudd' CUDD_LIB='-L/opt/local/lib/cudd -lcudd'

To make this behavior permanent, change the variables CUDD_INC and CUDD_LIB in
the ``Makefile`` of gr1c.  To run tests against gr1c in this setting, replace
"all" with "tests" in the previous command, or change ``tests/Makefile``
similarly.
